softperipheral: Documentation (#1707)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrfxlib: softperipheral/doc/sQSPI/nrf54H20_porting_v0_1_0.rst

   * :file:`nrfx/drivers/include` - Includes the nrfx driver header files.
     For example, the :file:`nrfx_dppi.h` file.
   * Path to the application-specific headers and macros.
     For example, the :file:`nrfx_glue.h`, :file:`nrfx_log.h`, or a configuration header file.
     See an example configuration for the :file:`nrfx_config.h` file:

      .. code-block:: c

         #ifndef NRFX_CONFIG_H__
         #define NRFX_CONFIG_H__

         #include "softperipheral_regif.h" // To Resolve correct VPR IRQn for the SoC.
         #define nrfx_qspi2_irq_handler        SP_VPR_IRQHandler

         #define NRFX_QSPI2_ENABLED            (1)
         #define NRFX_QSPI2_MAX_NUM_DATA_LINES (4)

         #endif // NRFX_CONFIG_H__

Compiling source files
======================

For an sQSPI application to function properly, you must compile the driver implementation from the source file :file:`nrfx_qspi2.c`.

Application core and FLPR configuration
***************************************

You must adjust the settings for the nRF54H20 SoC to run at highest base clock frequency.

To work with any of the following settings, ensure you have completed the following:

> * You have allocated memory for the data pointers used by the sQSPI driver.
> 
>   The memory is independent from the one outlined in the :ref:`nrf54H20_porting_guide_ram_configuration` subsection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You have allocated memory for the data pointers used by the sQSPI driver.
  The memory is independent from the one outlined in the :ref:`nrf54H20_porting_guide_ram_configuration` subsection.
```

.. _nrf54H20_porting_guide:

nRF54H20 porting guide
######################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

This page provides a comprehensive overview of the code structure, file hierarchy, and essential configurations and requirements needed to successfully port and implement an sQSPI aplication on the nRF54H20 device.

.. _nrf54h20_porting_guide_code:

sQSPI Application code
**********************

> This structure shows the relevant files and directories in the `sdk-nrfxlib`_ :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This structure shows the relevant files and directories in the `sdk-nrfxlib`_ repository:
```

.. code-block::

   nrfxlib/
   ├──...
   └── softperipheral/
      ├── include
      │   ├── softperipheral_meta.h
      │   └── softperipheral_regif.h
      ├── ...
      └── sQSPI
          ├── include
          │   ├── hal
          │   │   └── nrf_qspi2.h
          │   ├── nrf54h20
          │   │   ├── sqspi_firmware.h
          │   │   ├── sqspi_firmware_v0.1.0.h
          │   │   └── ...
          │   ├── nrf_sp_qspi.h
          │   ├── nrfx_config_qspi2.h
          │   ├── nrfx_qspi2.h
          └── src
              └── nrfx_qspi2.c

.. note::
   The main interface for sQSPI is the :file:`nrfx_qspi2.h` file.

Header files
============

For an sQSPI application to function correctly, it requires specific header files used by the driver code (internal paths) and specific header files for nrfx (external dependencies).
You must include paths to these files in the build environment's list of include paths.
The following list is a detailed breakdown of the necessary paths:

* Repository internal paths:

  * :file:`softperipheral/include` - Soft peripherals register interface and metadata
  * :file:`softperipheral/sQSPI/include` - sQSPI register interface and driver header

>   * :file:`softperipheral/sQSPI/include/nrf54h20` - sQSPI FLPR firmware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * :file:`softperipheral/sQSPI/include/nrf54h20` - The sQSPI firmware for the Fast Lightweight Peripheral Processor (FLPR)
```

* External dependencies:

>    * Path to :file:`nrfx` to include the main nrfx header file (:file:`nrfx.h`).
>    * Path to :file:`nrfx/drivers/include`, to include nrfx driver header files.
>      For example the :file:`nrfx_dppi.h` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * :file:`nrfx` - Includes the main nrfx header file (:file:`nrfx.h`).
   * :file:`nrfx/drivers/include` - Includes nrfx driver header files.
     For example, the :file:`nrfx_dppi.h` file.
```

   * Path to the application-specific headers and macros.
     For example, the :file:`nrfx_glue.h`, :file:`nrfx_log.h`, or a configuration header file.
     See an example configuration for the :file:`nrfx_config.h` file:

      .. code-block:: c

         #ifndef NRFX_CONFIG_H__
         #define NRFX_CONFIG_H__

         #include "softperipheral_regif.h" // To Resolve correct VPR IRQn for the SoC.
         #define nrfx_qspi2_irq_handler        SP_VPR_IRQHandler

         #define NRFX_QSPI2_ENABLED            (1)
         #define NRFX_QSPI2_MAX_NUM_DATA_LINES (4)

         #endif // NRFX_CONFIG_H__

Compiling source files
======================

For an sQSPI application to function properly, you must compile the driver implementation from the source file :file:`nrfx_qspi2.c`.

Application core and FLPR configuration
***************************************

You must adjust the settings for the nRF54H20 SoC to run at highest base clock frequency.

> .. note::
>    In any of the following settings, it is assumed that you have allocated memory for the data pointers used by the sQSPI driver.
> 
>    The memory is independent from the one outlined in the :ref:`nrf54H20_porting_guide_ram_configuration` subsection.
>    It is designated to function as shared memory for communication purposes, rather than containing the sQSPI executable code.
> 
>    In any of the following settings, it is assumed that you have enabled the FLPR access to the ``MEMCONF`` peripheral.
>    This access is necessary to properly deactivate sQSPI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To work with any of the following settings, ensure you have completed the following:

* You have allocated memory for the data pointers used by the sQSPI driver.
  The memory is independent from the one outlined in the :ref:`nrf54H20_porting_guide_ram_configuration` subsection.
  It is designated to function as shared memory for communication purposes, rather than containing the sQSPI executable code.
* You have enabled the FLPR access to the ``MEMCONF`` peripheral.
  This access is necessary to properly deactivate sQSPI.
```

Author: a last minute workaround is in place, nRF54H20 has no access to MEMCONF, will delete the corresponding section but apply the rest of the suggested change

Security configuration
======================

Configure the security settings for the nRF54H20 device based on the operational requirements of your application.

Secure environment
------------------

In a secure configuration, both the application core and the FLPR core of the nRF54H20 device must operate within a secure environment enabled by TrustZone Secure.

> Non-Secure environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-secure environment
```

      * - **P7.2**
        - IO1
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P7.3**
        - IO2
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P7.4**
        - IO3
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P7.5**
        - CSN
        - Output
        - Disconnected
        - No pull

   .. tab:: **P9** GPIO pins

    .. list-table::
      :widths: 10 10 20 20 20
      :header-rows: 1

      * - GPIO pin
        - sQSPI role
        - Direction config
        - Input config
        - Pin pull config
      * - **P9.0**
        - SCK
        - Output
        - Disconnected
        - No pull
      * - **P9.1**
        - IO0
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P9.2**
        - IO1
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P9.3**
        - IO2
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P9.4**
        - IO3
        - Output
        - Connected
        - Pull-up
      * - **P9.5**
        - CSN
        - Output
        - Disconnected
        - No pull

.. note::
   sQSPI driver provides a default GPIO configuration and multiplexing.

>    This setup is applied when both :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_gpio_cfg` and :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_pmux_cfg` are set to ``false``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You can apply this setup by setting :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_gpio_cfg` and :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_pmux_cfg` to ``false``.
```

      │   └── softperipheral_regif.h
      ├── ...
      └── sQSPI
          ├── include
          │   ├── hal
          │   │   └── nrf_qspi2.h
          │   ├── nrf54h20
          │   │   ├── sqspi_firmware.h
          │   │   ├── sqspi_firmware_v0.1.0.h
          │   │   └── ...
          │   ├── nrf_sp_qspi.h
          │   ├── nrfx_config_qspi2.h
          │   ├── nrfx_qspi2.h
          └── src
              └── nrfx_qspi2.c

.. note::
   The main interface for sQSPI is the :file:`nrfx_qspi2.h` file.

Header files
============

For an sQSPI application to function correctly, it requires specific header files used by the driver code (internal paths) and specific header files for nrfx (external dependencies).
You must include paths to these files in the build environment's list of include paths.
The following list is a detailed breakdown of the necessary paths:

* Repository internal paths:

  * :file:`softperipheral/include` - Soft peripherals register interface and metadata
  * :file:`softperipheral/sQSPI/include` - sQSPI register interface and driver header
  * :file:`softperipheral/sQSPI/include/nrf54h20` - sQSPI FLPR firmware

* External dependencies:

>    * Path to :file:`nrfx` to include the main nrfx header file - :file:`nrfx.h`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * Path to :file:`nrfx` to include the main nrfx header file (:file:`nrfx.h`).
```

>    * Path to :file:`nrfx/drivers/include`, to include nrfx driver header files - For example :file:`nrfx_dppi.h`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * Path to :file:`nrfx/drivers/include`, to include nrfx driver header files.
     For example, the :file:`nrfx_dppi.h` file.
```

>    * Path to the application-specific headers and macros - For example :file:`nrfx_glue.h`, :file:`nrfx_log.h`, or a configuration header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * Path to the application-specific headers and macros.
     For example, the :file:`nrfx_glue.h`, :file:`nrfx_log.h`, or a configuration header file.
```

     See an example configuration for the :file:`nrfx_config.h` file:

      .. code-block:: c

         #ifndef NRFX_CONFIG_H__
         #define NRFX_CONFIG_H__

         #include "softperipheral_regif.h" // To Resolve correct VPR IRQn for the SoC.
         #define nrfx_qspi2_irq_handler        SP_VPR_IRQHandler

         #define NRFX_QSPI2_ENABLED            (1)
         #define NRFX_QSPI2_MAX_NUM_DATA_LINES (4)

         #endif // NRFX_CONFIG_H__

Source files
============

For an sQSPI application to function properly, you must compile the driver implementation from the source file :file:`nrfx_qspi2.c`.

Application core and FLPR configuration
***************************************

> For an sQSPI application to run properly, you must adjust the settings for the nRF54H20 SoC to run at highest base clock frequency. The user/integrator should take care of this.

Author: I will do a wide search for the term, I've noticed this too

   It is designated to function as shared memory for communication purposes, rather than containing the sQSPI executable code.

   In any of the following settings, it is assumed that you have enabled the FLPR access to the ``MEMCONF`` peripheral.
   This access is necessary to properly deactivate sQSPI

Security configuration
======================

Secure
----------

In as secure configuration, both the application core and the FLPR core of the nRF54H20 device must operate within a secure environment enabled by TrustZone Secure.

Non-Secure
----------

In a non-secure configuration, both the application core and the FLPR core of the nRF54H20 device must operate outside the secure environment (without TrustZone Secure).

GPIO configuration
******************

The provided table details the configuration for each GPIO pin used in the sQSPI application.
The following options are available, assuming that the FLPR core has access to these ports/pins:

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: **P7** GPIO pins

    .. list-table::
      :widths: 10 10 20 20 20
      :header-rows: 1

      * - GPIO pin

>         - sQSPI Role

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - sQSPI role
```

   This setup is applied when both :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_gpio_cfg` and :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_pmux_cfg` are set to ``false``.

Configuring pins
================

In some cases you might have to modify the sQSPI driver configuration.
For example, when changing pin drive strength to guarantee signal integrity for a new PCB design.
You must address these cases on the sQSPI application code:

* If you set the :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_gpio_cfg` variable to ``true``, the GPIO configuration is not managed by the sQSPI driver and it must be manually handled by the application. 
  This is a requirement for the nRF54H20 device.
* If you set the :c:var:`nrfx_qspi2_cfg_t.skip_pmux_cfg` variable to ``true``, the GPIO multiplexing is not managed by the sQSPI driver and it must be manually handled by the application. 
  This is a requirement for the nRF54H20 device.

GPIO multiplexing must be handled by setting the correct ``CTRLSEL`` value in UICR.

Additionally, the sQSPI application requires FastPad bias configuration to run at high frequency on SCLK.

Memory retention configuration
******************************

> The sQSPI Soft Peripheral requires RAM retention in order to go into the lowest power consumption mode, which can be called through the :c:func:`nrfx_qspi2_deactivate` API.

Author: I just got confirmation that we won't support low power modes in nRF54H20. No way for the user to do this. I will remove this section
